# Chapter 18: (1)

## QUESTIONS

## Multiple Choice Questions

Tick ( $\checkmark$ ) the correct answer.
8.1 The phenomenon of polarization of light is:
(a) the process of scattering of light
(b) the property of light to vibrate in a specific plane
(c) the ability of light to travel in a straight line
(d) the phenomenon of light changing colour
8.2 Malus's law states that:
(a) the intensity of light is directly proportional to the square of the cosine of the angle between the light wave and the analyzer
(b) the intensity of light is directly proportional to the square of the sine of the angle between the light wave and the analyzer
(c) the intensity of light is directly proportional to the angle between the light wave and the analyzer
(d) the intensity of light is inversely proportional to the angle between the light wave and the analyzer
8.3 The intensity of light when it passes through a polarizer:
(a) increases
(b) decreases
(c) remains the same
(d) becomes zero
8.4 The angle between the light wave and the analyzer is called:
(a) polarization angle
(b) refraction angle
(c) reflection angle
(d) azimuth angle
8.5 The key purpose of an analyzer in a polarization experiment is:
(a) to polarize the light
(b) to measure the intensity of light
(c) to change the direction of light
(d) to filter out unwanted light
8.6 The mathematical representation of Malus's law is:
(a) $I=t_{0} \cos ^{2} \theta$
(b) $I=I_{0} \sin ^{2} \theta$
(c) $I=t_{0} \tan ^{2} \theta$
(d) $I=I_{0} \cot ^{2} \theta$
8.7 The effect of increasing the angle between the light wave and the analyzer on the intensity of light is:
(a) the intensity increases
(b) the intensity decreases
(c) the intensity remains the same(d) the intensity becomes zero
8.8 The condition for maximum intensity of light in a polarization experiment is when:
(a) the light wave and analyzer are perpendicular
(b) the light wave and analyzer are parallel
(c) the light wave and analyzer are at an angle of $45^{\circ}$
(d) the light wave and analyzer are at an angle of $60^{\circ}$

# Physics II

8.9 The unwanted light that interferes with vision is termed as:
(a) haze
(b) glare
(c) contrast
(d) flare
8.10 Who predicted the existence of gravitational waves?
(a) Galileo Galilei
(b) Albert Einstein
(c) Issac Newton
(d) Leonardo da Vinci
8.11 What are gravitational waves?
(a) Electromagnetic waves
(b) Mechanical Waves
(c) Ocean waves
(d) Ripples in the fabric of spacetime
8.12 Which is the primary method used to detect gravitational waves?
(a) Optical telescopes
(b) Radio telescopes
(c) LASER interferometry
(d) Gravitational lensing
8.13 Which of the following is a primary source of gravitational waves?
(a) Binary black hole merger
(b) Solar flares
(c) Earthquake
(d) Solar wind

## Short Answer Questions

8.1 Why are the polarold sunglasses better than the ordinary sunglasses?
8.2 Is light from the sky partially polarized? How is it so?
8.3 How is Malus's law used in everyday life?
8.4 What are the applications of Brewster's angle?
8.5 What is the space-time curvature?

## Constructed Response Questions

8.1 Write down some applications of plane polarized.
8.2 Would it be possible to use a polarizer as an analyzer? If yes, give at least two examples.
8.3 Explain how Malus's law is used in the design of polarized sunglasses. How do these surfaces reduce glare from reflective surface? Provide an example to illustrate your answer.
8.4 How will the sky appear if there had been no atmosphere?
8.5 What is the significance of detecting gravitational waves?
8.6 How are tidal forces formed?

## Comprehensive Questions

8.1 Define the phenomenon of polarization of waves. How does polarization of electromagnetic waves occur? Also classify the polarization of waves.
8.2 How can the plane polarized light be produced and detected? What does it prove?
8.3 How can polarized light be obtained by the method of reflection? Explain.
8.4 State Malus's law. Explain the intensity formula.

# Physics II

8.5 What is a polaroid? Explain two main applications of polarization.
8.6 What are gravitational waves? Describe the basio types of gravitational waves.
8.7 What is an interferometer? Describe the basic LIGO interferometer in detail.
8.8 What is meant by optical activity? Discuss it.

## Numerical Problems

8.1 When an unpolarized light of intensity $I_{0}$ is incident on a polarizing sheet, find the Intensity of light which does not get transmitted.
(Ans: $\frac{1}{2}$ )
8.2 A polarized light beam passes through a polarizer at an angle of $45^{\circ}$. Find the intensity of the transmitted light if the initial intensity is $100 \mathrm{Wm}^{2}$. (Ans: $50 \mathrm{Wm}^{2}$ )
8.3 A light wave passes through a polarizer with its electric field aligned at $30^{\circ}$ to the horizontal. If the amplitude of the wave is 10 units, what is the amplitude of the wave passing through the polarizer?
(Ans: 8.86 units)
8.4 What angle is required between the direction of polaroid light and the axis of a polaroid filter to reduce its intensity by $85 \%$ ?
(Ans: $67.5^{\circ}$ )
8.5 An unpolarized light having intensity of $15 \mathrm{~W} \mathrm{~m}^{2}$ is incident on a pair of polarizers. The first polaroid filter has its transmission axis at $60^{\circ}$ from the vertical. The second polaroid filter has its transmission axis at $20^{\circ}$ from the vertical. Calculate the intensity of light transmitted to both filters: (Ans: $7.5 \mathrm{Wm}^{2}, 5.6 \mathrm{Wm}^{2}$, respectively)
8.6 Two polarizing sheets have their polarizing directions parallel so that intensity of emitted light is maximum. Through what angle must either sheet be rotated if the intensity is to be dropped by half?
(Ans: $45^{\circ}$ )
8.7 We wish to use a glass plate of refractive index of 1.5 in air as a polarizer. Find the polarizing angle and angle of refraction.
(Ans: $56.3^{\circ}, 33.7^{\circ}$, respectively)
8.8 At what angle of incidence, will light reflected from water be completely polarized?
(Ans: $53^{\circ}$ )
8.9 A beam of unpolarized light is incident on a stack of four polarizing sheets that are lined up so that the characteristic direction of each is rotated by $30^{\circ}$ clockwise with respect to the preceding sheet. What fraction in percentage of the incident intensity be transmitted?
(Ans: $21 \%$ )
8.10 A polarizer and an analyzer have their axes aligned at $60^{\circ}$. What is the fraction of the initial intensity that emerges?
(Ans: 0.25 )
8.11 If the gravitational waves have a wavelength of 3000 km , then find their frequency assuming it moves with the speed of light?
(Ans: 100 Hz )